[New Post] How to Build an Express Application using Prisma (#1219)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2022-07-20-express-prisma-tailwind.md

---
layout: blog_post

> title: "How to Build an Express Application using Prisma"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "How to Build an Express Application Using Prisma"
```
title case

author: nickolas-fisher
by: contractor
communities: [javascript]
description: "Learn how to build a workout tracker application using Express and Prisma and secure it using Okta."
tags: [prisma, node, express, passport]
tweets:
- "Learn how to build a workout tracker application using Express and Prisma and secure it using Okta ⚡️"
image: blog/express-prisma-and-tailwindcss/social.jpg
github: https://github.com/oktadev/okta-express-prisma-tailwind-example
type: conversion
---

> [Express](https://expressjs.com/) is one of the most popular web frameworks available today.  Understanding the tools available when building any web application is critical to being a good developer.

Reviewer 2: My 2 cents... I wonder if this paragraph should be skipped for greater impact and more draw. I think the selling point for this article is using Prisma in an Express project, right? Not Express. So maybe start with the Prisma paragraph and state we'll use Express for this project?

> [Prisma](https://www.prisma.io/) is an ORM for Node.js using TypeScript.  It integrates with many of the most popular databases today, including MySQL, SQL Server, SQLite, and MongoDB.   Prisma emphasizes a human-readable schema with a type-safe database client.  Prisma includes other features such as migrations, seed data, and a virtual database browser.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Prisma](https://www.prisma.io/) is an ORM (object–relational mapping) tool for Node.js using TypeScript.  The software integrates with many of the most popular databases today, including MySQL, SQL Server, SQLite, and MongoDB, and emphasizes a human-readable schema with a type-safe database client.  Prisma also includes other features such as migrations, seed data, and a virtual database browser.   
```
Avoids starting a series of sentences with the same first word. Spells out the first use of an acronym that may be unfamiliar to some readers.

> You will use Prisma to connect to a database server in this project.  You will build a schema to model a workout tracker application.  Then you will create some seed data and use Prisma to run migrations and seed your database.  You will then create the web application using [Pug](https://pugjs.org/api/getting-started.html) and [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) to build the application frontend.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 In this project, you will use Prisma to connect to a database server.  You will build a schema to model a workout tracker application.  Then you'll create some seed data and use Prisma to run migrations and seed your database.  Finally, you'll create the web application using [Pug](https://pugjs.org/api/getting-started.html) and [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) to build the application frontend.  
```
Avoids starting a series of sentences with the same first word.

{% include toc.md %}

### Prerequisites

This tutorial uses the following technologies but doesn't require any prior experience:

> - An IDE for JavaScript.  I will use [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) but you can use Atom, Webstorm, or any other IDE you prefer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An IDE for JavaScript.  I will use [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) but you can use Atom, Webstorm, or any other IDE you prefer.
```
punctuation

> - An IDE for JavaScript.  I will use [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) but you can use Atom, Webstorm, or any other IDE you prefer

Reviewer 2: I recommend removing Atom since it is officially sunsetted.

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/)

> - A database, one of PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQLite, SQL Server, or MongoDB.  In this tutorial you will use SQLite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A database, such as PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQLite, SQL Server, or MongoDB.  In this tutorial we'll use SQLite.
```
punctuation

- [Okta CLI](https://cli.okta.com)

> If you'd like to skip the tutorial and just check out the fully built project, you can go [view it on GitHub](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-express-prisma-tailwind-example).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you'd like to skip the tutorial and check out the fully built project, you can go [view it on GitHub](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-express-prisma-tailwind-example).
```

> ## Create your Okta application

Reviewer 2: Should this be "Create your authorization server" or "Create your OAuth2 authorization server"? My understanding is that we should consider keywords in the headers here

Create a new directory for your application.  Use the `cd` command to navigate to that folder. 

{% include setup/cli.md type="web" loginRedirectUri="http://localhost:3000/authorization-code/callback" logoutRedirectUri="http://localhost:3000/" %}

> ## Create your Express Application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create your Express application
```
sentence case

Next, you will use the `express-generator` application generator tool to quickly scaffold your application.  Run the following command.

```console

> npx express-generator --view=pug

Reviewer 2: Consider adding a version to the `npx` command. I'm guessing it should be

```shell
npx express-generator@4.16 --view=pug
```

```

> Next, you will need to install your packages.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can install your packages.  
```
sentence variation.

```console
npm i @prisma/client@3.13.0
npm i dotenv@16.0.0
npm i passport@0.5.2
npm i passport-openidconnect@0.1.1
npm i express-session@1.17
npm i -D tailwindcss@3.0.24
npm i -D prisma@3.13.0
```

> - `@prisma/client` is used to access the database from your server code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `@prisma/client` is used to access the database from your server code.
```

> - `dotenv` reads configuration settings from `.env` files like the one produced by the Okta CLI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dotenv` reads configuration settings from `.env` files like the one produced by the Okta CLI.
```

> - `passport` is a middleware for Node.js that is flexible enough to handle most authentication scenarios, including Okta.  `passport-openidconnect` is a module for passport that lets you authenticate with OpenID Connect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `passport` is a middleware for Node.js that is flexible enough to handle most authentication scenarios, including Okta.  `passport-openidconnect` is a module for passport that lets you authenticate with OpenID Connect.
```

- `express-session` is required for passport.  Express apps use this package for session support.  You application must intiialize session support to use passport.  

> - `Tailwind CSS` is the CSS framework you will use.  If you've never used Tailwind before, you may wonder why it's a development dependency.  This is because Tailwind will dynamically build your CSS files from your views and configuration.  More on that later

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Tailwind CSS` is the CSS framework you will use.  If you've never used Tailwind before, you may wonder why it's a development dependency.  This is because Tailwind will dynamically build your CSS files from your views and configuration.  More on that later.
```

> - `Tailwind CSS` is the CSS framework you will use.  If you've never used Tailwind before, you may wonder why it's a development dependency.  This is because Tailwind will dynamically build your CSS files from your views and configuration.  More on that later

Reviewer 2: Should this be `tailwindcss` for consistency?

- `prisma` is the ORM you are using.  This is a dev dependency because the Prisma library handles the migrations, seed data, etc., while the `@prisma/client` package is used in your application at runtime.

At this point, you will initialize Tailwind CSS and Prisma. You will configure them for usage later on.

Start with Prisma and run the following command.

```console

> npx prisma init

Reviewer 2: Should there be a version specified on this npx command too? (or verify that it will use the version specified in package.json automatically)

```

> This command will add a new folder named `prisma` to your application. This also adds a file called `.env` to your project with some default configuration. Replace the contents of that file with the code below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command will add a new folder named `prisma` to your application. It also adds a file called `.env` to your project with some default configuration. Replace the contents of that file with the code below.
```

Your seed data will use the `SEED_USER_NAME` setting.  You want to ensure that it's the same as the Okta username with which you sign in.  This will allow the application to associate your logged-in user with the data you will seed into your database.  

Next, update your `package.json` file with the following code.

```JSON
{
  "name": "workout-app",
  "version": "0.0.0",
  "private": true,
  "prisma": {
    "seed": "node prisma/seed.js"
  },
  "scripts": {
    "start": "node ./bin/www"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "@prisma/client": "^3.13.0",
    "cookie-parser": "~1.4.4",
    "debug": "~2.6.9",
    "dotenv": "^16.0.0",
    "express": "~4.16.1",
    "http-errors": "~1.6.3",
    "morgan": "~1.9.1",
    "passport": "^0.5.2",
    "passport-openidconnect": "^0.1.1",
    "pug": "2.0.0-beta11"
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "prisma": "^3.13.0",
    "tailwindcss": "^3.0.24"
  }
}
```

> This will add the `prisma seed` command you will need later.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will add the `prisma seed` command you need later.  
```

Now you can initialize Tailwind CSS.  

```console

> npx tailwindcss init

Reviewer 2: Consider specifying version here too (or verify that it will use the version specified in package.json automatically)

```

> This will add a new file called `tailwind.config.js` to the root of your application.  Replace the contents of that file with the code below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You've now added a new file called `tailwind.config.js` to the root of your application.  Replace the contents of that file with the code below.
```

```javascript
module.exports = {
  content: ["./views/**/*.pug"],
  theme: {
    extend: {},
  },
  plugins: [],
}
```

> This will tell Tailwind CSS where to find the classes you used in your application.  In this case, you want Tailwind to look in the `.pug` files in your `views` directory.  Tailwind CSS is highly extensible, as seen by the configuration object's `theme` and `plugins` settings.  A deep dive into this is out of the scope of this article, but I encourage you to look into Tailwind CSS's site for more information.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this step, you tell Tailwind CSS where to find the classes you used in your application.  In this case, you want Tailwind to look in the `.pug` files in your `views` directory.  Tailwind CSS is highly extensible, as seen by the configuration object's `theme` and `plugins` settings.  A deep dive into this is out of the scope of this article, but I encourage you to look into Tailwind CSS's site for more information.  
```

### Use Prisma to create your database

> The next task is to create the database for your application.  This will involve writing the schema, writing some seed data, creating the migration, and applying the migration, which will also seed your data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next task is to create the database for your application.  Steps will involve writing the schema, writing some seed data, creating the migration, and applying the migration, which will also seed your data.
```
avoids repeating the same word to begin sentences.

            units: "Reps",
            date: new Date(2022, 1, 2),
            minutes: 5,
            calories: 50
          },
          {
            exercise: "Pushups",
            amount: 100,
            units: "Reps",
            date: new Date(2022, 1, 2),
            minutes: 10,
            calories: 100
          },
          {
            exercise: "Situps",
            amount: 50,
            units: "Reps",
            date: new Date(2022, 1, 4),
            minutes: 5,
            calories: 50
          },
          {
            exercise: "Pushups",
            amount: 100,
            units: "Reps",
            date: new Date(2022, 1, 4),
            minutes: 10,
            calories: 100
          },
        ],
      },
    },
  });
}

main()
  .catch((e) => {
    console.error(e);
    process.exit(1);
  })
  .finally(async () => {
    await prisma.$disconnect();
  });
```

Prisma knows to use the `seed.js` file from the command you added to `package.json`.  This file will insert the data when you run that command.  

You can now add and apply the migration using the Prisma CLI. From the root of your application directory, run the following command.

```console

> npx prisma migrate dev --name init

Reviewer 2: Consider specifying version here too (or verify that it will use the version specified in package.json automatically)

```

The CLI has several ways to add and apply migrations.  I suggest you understand the best way to manage migrations for your environment.  The method above is the easiest and fastest way to prepare your database.  As part of the migration process, this command will look for the `seed` command from your `package.json` and run that as well.  Once complete, your database should be ready with a database full of seed data ready to work.

> ### Complete the development of your express application

Reviewer 2: I don't know if level 3 headings target keywords, but consider using "Add OIDC authentication" or something like that.  (also consider making it level 2 heading along with previous heading with the word "Prisma" in it??)

Now that your database is ready, you can turn your attention to the core of your application.

First, add a new file in the root of your application called `ensureLoggedIn.js` and add the following code to it.

```javascript
function ensureLoggedIn(req, res, next) {
    if (req.isAuthenticated()) {
        return next();
    }
    res.redirect('/login')
}

module.exports = ensureLoggedIn;
```

This little piece of middleware will make sure the user is authenticated.  If they aren't, you will redirect them to the `login` route, which you will configure to use Okta.  Otherwise, you will allow the user to reach the next screen.  

> Next, you can update your routes in the `routes` directory.  First, remove `users.js` as you won't be using that.  Next, replace the code in `index.js` with the following.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you can update your routes in the `routes` directory.  First, remove `users.js` as you won't be using that.  Replace the code in `index.js` with the following.
```

```javascript
var express = require('express');
var router = express.Router();

/* GET home page. */
router.get('/', function(req, res, next) {
  res.render('index', { title: 'The Workout Tracker - Home', isAuthenticated: req.isAuthenticated() });
});

module.exports = router;
```

Here you will pass a property for `isAuthenticated` so your layout page can properly display a login or logout button.  

Next, add a file in the `routes` directory for `dashboard.js` with the following code.

```javascript
var express = require("express");
var router = express.Router();

const { PrismaClient } = require("@prisma/client");
const prisma = new PrismaClient();

const ensureLoggedIn = require("../ensureLoggedIn");

/* GET home page. */
router.get("/", ensureLoggedIn, async function (req, res) {
  const username = req.user.username;

  const dbUser = await prisma.user.findUnique({
    where: {
      username: username,
    },
    include: {
      workoutLogs: true,
    },
  });

  res.render("dashboard", {
    title: "The Workout Tracker - Dashboard",
    isAuthenticated: req.isAuthenticated(),
    user: dbUser
  });
});

module.exports = router;
```

> There's a lot of magic in this route.  First, you are using the `ensureLoggedIn` middleware to protect this route.  Then you can extract the username from the request and look up the user in the database using the Prisma client.  Since the user has a property for its workout logs, you can pass the user as the model and parse the logs on the pug view you will create.  This will give the view access to the user's name as well.  Of course, you could query the `workoutLogs` table directly and include features such as pagination and searching if that better fit your workflow.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a lot of magic in this route.  First, you are using the `ensureLoggedIn` middleware to protect the route.  Then you can extract the username from the request and look up the user in the database using the Prisma client.  Since the user has a property for its workout logs, you can pass the user as the model and parse the logs on the pug view you will create.  This will give view access to the user's name as well.  Of course, you could query the `workoutLogs` table directly and include features such as pagination and search if this approach better fits your workflow.  
```
alignment of verb tense in closing sentence

> Next, replace the code in `app.js` with the following.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, replace the code in `app.js` with the following.
```

app.use(express.urlencoded({ extended: false }));
app.use(cookieParser());
app.use(express.static(path.join(__dirname, 'public')));

app.use('/login', passport.authenticate('oidc'));

app.use('/authorization-code/callback',
  passport.authenticate('oidc', { failureRedirect: '/error' }),
  (req, res, next) => {
    res.redirect('/dashboard');
  }
);

app.post('/logout', (req, res) => {
  req.logout();
  req.session.destroy();
  res.redirect('/');
});

app.use('/', indexRouter);
app.use('/dashboard', dashboardRouter);

// catch 404 and forward to error handler
app.use(function(req, res, next) {
  next(createError(404));
});

// error handler
app.use(function(err, req, res, next) {
  // set locals, only providing error in development
  res.locals.message = err.message;
  res.locals.error = req.app.get('env') === 'development' ? err : {};

  // render the error page
  res.status(err.status || 500);
  res.render('error');
});

module.exports = app;
```

You updated your routes to properly use the `dashboard` routes as well as any login or logout routes that Okta will use.  You also set up passport to use Okta using the values the Okta CLI produced in the `.okta.env` file.  

> ### Add your views to bring your project to life

Reviewer 2: Same note here about header level and keywords you want to target

doctype html
html
  head
    title= title
    link(rel='stylesheet', href='/stylesheets/output.css')
  body
    nav.flex.items-center.justify-between.flex-wrap.bg-teal-500.p-6.flex.items-center.flex-shrink-0.text-white.mr-6
      span.font-semibold.text-xl.tracking-tight.pr-2 The Workout Tracker
      .w-full.block.flex-grow(class='lg:flex lg:items-center lg:w-auto')
        .text-sm(class='lg:flex-grow')
        div
          if(isAuthenticated)
            form(action="logout" method="POST") 
              button(type="submit").inline-block.text-sm.px-4.py-2.leading-none.border.rounded.text-white.border-white.mt-4 Logout
          else 
            a.inline-block.text-sm.px-4.py-2.leading-none.border.rounded.text-white.border-white.mt-4(href='Login' class='hover:border-transparent hover:text-teal-500 hover:bg-white lg:mt-0') Login
    
    block content
```

You'll notice a couple of things about this file.  First, the classes are very specific and plentiful.  This is typical of Tailwind CSS.  Rather than defining how a specific element looks, Tailwind CSS strives to define how a particular style looks, then you can add and remove styles from elements to fit the desired look.  

> The other thing you'll see is the Login/Logout button that will change based on the `isAuthenticated` property.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The other thing you'll see is the **Login/Logout** button that will change based on the `isAuthenticated` property.  
```
bolding the text since it refers to a UI element

    .w-full.p-6
        .bg-white.border-transparent.rounded-lg.shadow-xl
            .bg-gradient-to-b.from-gray-300.to-gray-100.uppercase.text-gray-800.border-b-2.border-gray-300.rounded-tl-lg.rounded-tr-lg.p-2
                h2.font-bold.uppercase.text-gray-600 Workout Log
            .p-5
                table.w-full.p-5.text-gray-700
                    thead
                        tr
                            th.text-left.text-blue-900 Date
                            th.text-left.text-blue-900 Execise
                            th.text-left.text-blue-900 Amount
                            th.text-left.text-blue-900 Time
                            th.text-left.text-blue-900 Calories Burned
                    tbody
                        each log in user.workoutLogs.sort((a,b) => a.date - b.date)
                            tr
                                td=log.date.toLocaleDateString()
                                td=log.exercise
                                td=log.amount + ' ' + log.units 
                                td=log.minutes + ' Minutes'
                                td=log.calories                        
```

> As you saw before, this page is protected.  Therefore, it requires that you have a user to access this page.  The application will pull the user details and workout logs and reform them into a summary at the top of the page with a couple of tables of the logs based on the exercises the user has performed.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you saw before, this page is protected.  Therefore, it requires that you have a user to access this page.  The application will pull the user details and workout logs and form them into a summary at the top of the page with a couple of tables of the logs based on the exercises the user has performed.  
```

## Test your application

You're now ready to start your application.  Run the following command.

```bash
npm run start
```

Once your application is started you should be able to navigate to *http://localhost:3000/* and see your home page.

{% img blog/express-prisma-and-tailwindcss/HomePage.PNG alt:"Home page" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

Use the login button at the top of the screen and navigate out to the Okta login page.  Once you've logged in you will be redirected back to your website where you will be able to see your dashboard page.

{% img blog/express-prisma-and-tailwindcss/DashboardPage.PNG alt:"Dashboard page" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

## What you learned in this article

In this article, you learned how to use Prisma to define a schema for your database.  You then learned how to create a migration from that schema and seed your database.  You saw that Prisma could be used with the most popular database options, including SQL Server, MySql, MongoDB, and more.  

> You also learned how to build a CSS file with Tailwind CSS.  You learned the simple tailwind configuration and how the Tailwind CLI uses your code to build its CSS file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You also learned how to build a CSS file with Tailwind CSS.  We walked through a simple tailwind configuration and how the Tailwind CLI uses your code to build its CSS file.
```

Finally, you learned how to secure your express application using passport.

> ## Learn More About Node, Authentication, and Okta

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Learn more about Node, authentication, and Okta
```
sentence case for section headings

Can't get enough of Node? Check out our [quickstarts for Node](https://developer.okta.com/code/nodejs/) and other excellent posts from the Okta Developer blog:
- [Build and Deploy a Node.js App to Heroku](/blog/2022/02/28/build-deploy-node-app-heroku)
- [Node.js Login with Express and OIDC](/blog/2020/06/16/nodejs-login)

> - [Build a Node.js API with TypeScript](/blog/2019/05/07/nodejs-typescript-api)

Reviewer: We seem to be missing the usual closing boilerplate... :

"Make sure you follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/oktadev) and subscribe to our [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/c/oktadev) channel. Please comment below if you have any questions or want to share what tutorial you’d like to see next."
